# RFC-001 - Weaviate Operator

## Objective

Develop a Kubernetes operator to help solve through automation many of the operational challenges inherent in managing a database at scale.
## Motivation 

Operational support for Weaviate customers is currently heavily indexed towards manual work. Semi-automated, semi-consistent process exist to manage Weaviate instances across different deployment scenarios. Kubernetes is used to provide the runtime platform and Weaviate instance typical deployed using an official Helm chart.

Ownership of various aspects of deployment operations and process are distributed across the organization. Coordinating development efforts to ensure there is alignment on the trajectory will be key to ensuring sustainable long-term operations. 

## Scope

The following Weaviate deployment Wescenarios can be identified:
- 1. WCS Serverless (managed multi-tenant)
- 2. WCS Dedicated VPC (managed single tenant)
- 3. WCS with Self-managed Cluster (single tenant, on-prem data plane)
- 4. On-premise 
- 5. Legacy installs
- 6. Marketplace

Deployment scenarios 1-4 can be considered in scope for the operator.  

The following tasks can be considered in scope for the operator:
- 1. Deployment`
- 2. Migration
- 3. Update
- 4. Configuration
- 5. Scaling & Resizing
- 6. Backups

The following are not in-scope:
- management of underlying cloud infrastructure
- management of WCS or any related services
## Benefits

**Consolidate Cloud Ops Effort**

The operator design proposed in this RFC will enable the company to consolidate operations across multiple deployment scenarios in a single tool. This enables Weaviate to extract maximum value from the invest of engineering effort in developing and supporting the Weaviate operator. 

**Reduce Toil**

By its very nature the operator will also unburden Weaviate SREs from day-to-day maintenance operations and enable the team to support a much large customer base without scaling the engineering effort.

## Design 

### Operations

**Deployment & Configuration**

Cluster instances will be managed using a `Cluster` resource. The cluster resource will be responsible for managing pods running weaviate database instances. The `Cluster` resource will also act as an abstraction at which other operations (such as backup) can point.

```yaml
apiVersion: cloud.weaviate.io/v1alpha1
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  name: wv-stg
  namespace: default
spec:
  instances: 3 # (optional: fixed number of instances)
  autoscaling: # (optional: configures an autoscaling resources)
    minReplicas: 3
    maxReplicas: 9
  version: ">=v1.0.0" # version constraint supporting rolling updates
  storage: # defines the size of PVCs
    requests: 1Gi # initial requested disk size
    autoResizePolicy: # (optional: support automatic disk resize)
      limit: 10Gi # upper bound
      minFreeThreshold: 100Mi # threshold to trigger resize
      increment: 1Gi # resizing increment
  modules: # configure weaviate modules
    - name: backup
      enabled: true		  
  existingClusters: # (optional: support adopting existing clusters)
    matchLabels:
      weaviate.io/adopt: "true"
  nodeSelector: 
    matchLabels:
      instance/db: "true"
  tolerations:
    - key: weaviate-db
      operator: Exists
      effect: NoSchedule
  verify: # verify images are signed
    provider: cosign	  
  serviceAccountName: wv-stg-aws
status:
  conditions: []

```

**Rolling Updates**

The cluster controller will handle zero-downtime updates by managing the update process and verifying the cluster health. Automatic upgrades can be achieved be specifying a version constraint, e.g. `version: ">=v1.0.0"` 

**Scaling & Resizing**

Currently scaling horizontally is not well supported by Weaviate database. This should improve with the planned implementation of support for re-sharding. The operator can then can make use of multi-dimensional pod autoscaler in order to scale instances based on a set of constraints. It is recommend to leverage cluster-autoscaler or Karpenter in tandem with the MultiDim pod autoscaler to achieve right sized clusters.

Resizing of volumes is currently a straightforward if tedious process which can be easily automated by the operator on a per-cluster basis.

**Migration**

The [existing weaviate-migration](https://github.com/weaviate/weaviate-migration) script can be translated into a Migration controller.  The migration controller will watch the `Migration` Custom Resource object:

```yaml
apiVersion: cloud.weaviate.io/v1alpha1
kind: Migration
metadata:
  name: wv-migration-dev2stg
  namespace: default
spec:
  source:
    host: "https://my-source-cluster.weaviate.io:6339"
    type: grpc
  target: 
    host: "https://my-target-cluster.weaviate.io:6443"
    type: https
  schedule:
    startTime: "22-02-2024T02:00:00Z"
  timeout: 2h30m
  tolerations: # job spec tolerations
status:
  conditions: []

```

The controller will connect to the endpoint for each cluster based on `sourceRef` and `targetRef` and generate the jobs (or a single job with multiple go-routines) to perform the migration.

**Backup**

The operator can manage scheduled backups for clusters.

```yaml
apiVersion: cloud.weaviate.io/v1alpha1
kind: ScheduledBackup
metadata:
  name: wv-prod-backup
  namespace: default
spec:
  schedule: "0 4 * * *" # execute every day at 4AM
  exclude: # exclude items from backup
    collections: []
  clusterRef: # selector for cluster to backup
    name: wv-prod
    namespace: default
  storage: # storage location for backup data
    s3:
      bucket: s3://weaviate.prod.backups
  serviceAccountName: wv-aws # service account with credentials to authenticate with storage provider
status:
  conditions: []

```

### Operator Installation

The operator can be installed using a CLI, Helm Chart or Terraform provider.
